I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and
of the biology at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today we are discussing focus and concentration in tools
for improving your focus and concentration.
This is a topic that I've covered previously on the
given the lab podcast.
What in different contexts?
For instance, we had a very popular episode on ADHD
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, which, of course,
relates to the topic of focus and how to improve focus.
We also talked a lot about dopamine motivation
in the lab effect that's the title of a previous
also quite popular episode of this podcast.
But I've never before had a single episode solely devoted
to the tools to improve focus and concentration.
The rationale for improving this episode is to provide
people at one location where they can go and quickly access
the specific tools for increasing focus and concentration
that are known to be the most powerful tools and the most
of today's episode is going to include
description of several peer reviewed studies and the
tools that emerge from those scientific peer reviewed studies
that point to new and, fortunately, even briefer protocols
that I've described before.
So what I'm basically describing is tools that in a very short
amount of time, we'll allow you to significantly increase
your focus and concentration in those tools.
Those tools will include behavioral tools,
nutrition-based tools, supplement-based tools,
brain machine interface-based tools, and those of you that
are working with physician, prescription-drink tools.
Today's episode of Autosubaniph.
But young, we're old, if anything in between, whether
or not you have ADHD or not, today's episode is going to give
you tools that you can apply daily life, most all of them
are completely zero-clossed.
And those tools will allow you to tap into the chemistry
and the circuits within your brain and body that peer reviewed
science has reliably been possible,
particularly, improve your focus and concentration abilities.
Just to give you a little teaser of the kinds of tools that I'm going
to provide you today's episode, a previous
episode.
I'm going to have a podcast with Dr. Wendy Suzuki,
Dr. Suzuki is a professor of psychology and neuroscience at
New York University, or NYU as it's commonly referred to.
She's also the Dean, the Arts and Sciences at NYU,
her laboratory made a very important discovery,
which was that a very, very, very, very,
just 12, actually 13, if you really count the intro,
but 13 minute early meditation,
performed for a period of about eight weeks,
significantly increased people's focus and concentration
abilities.
The great news is, you didn't need all the options,
just that's how women's operating most studies.
So during today's episode, I will describe that five-day
time.
I'll also provide you an even briefer alternative to that,
for the call that you can use, if, for instance,
you find yourself with only three minutes,
four minutes or five minutes a day to meditate.
Great news is that it's quality power of use.
I have to support that form of meditation for your
improving focus and concentration and that falls under the
bend of the zero-cost tools that you could really use to
tap into the neurochemistry and neural circuits
that really allow you to take control of your cognitive
abilities and prove them up to the laboratory.
I'll also provide you an important details about that product,
called another protocol, so for instance,
contrary to popular belief it is not a good idea
to do a focused-based meditation, which in the four hours
of our dead-toned, many people, including some of the subjects
in that study performed by the Suzuki Lab,
found that when they did a focusing meditation
protocol, even if it was very common, it led to
difficulties and following the same sleep.
That's when counter-tooled, a lot of people heard about
meditation being late for sleep.
It turns out meditation might be great for sleep,
but certainly it's great for you to focus on that.
And I have a reminder that if you're going to apply a focus
meditation to look in order to improve your focus and concentration,
you make sure that that's informed not within four hours
of the time.
That's just a little bit too easy.
We'll show you the two-day meditation.
You can't even have the two-day meditation.
But I should mention that we have provided names
and shown them in our training, so that you can quickly go
to the studies that we describe, as well as some of the
behavioral tools and other tools that we'll cover.
We'll use that to use some of these things,
etc.
I think here again, is to provide you
a maximum number of tools for focusing
concentration that you can pick from and choose from
and apply in your life and try and eliminate
as much as possible.
We know that many of you are located outside of the United States.
That's valuable.
Second of all, I'm perhaps most important.
The quality of their supplements is second to none,
with the terms of purity and precision of the amounts of ingredients.
Third, you really emphasize supplements
are single ingredient supplements, and that are supplied in
dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol
that's optimized for costs and that's optimized for.
In fact, it is, and that you can add things and
remove things from your protocol in a way that's really
systematic and scientific.
This is really hard to do if you're taking
the lens of different supplements, if the dosages are
such that you can't titrate or that is
address the dosages of a given supplement.
So, by using single ingredient supplements, you can
go and build out the supplement kit that's ideal for you
and your specific needs.
You'd like to see the supplements that we've partnered with
Momentsus on, you can go to lidmomentus.com-human.
There you'll see those supplements and just keep in mind that
we are constantly expanding the library of supplements
available to Momentsus on a regular basis.
Again, that's lidmomentus.com-human.
Before we begin, I'd like to check out the description
of the presentation research rules.
It is a very powerful study in the library after
the real cost of consuming food for the
insurance.
So, I'm going to give you a few to the summary of that.
Thank you for that soon.
I'd like to thank the sponsors for today's review.
The first sponsor is thesis.
thesis makes custom neutrophics.
You can't promise, but don't like the word
neutrophics because the translation of neutrophics is
not smart drugs.
And as a neuroscientist, I can tell you there is no
neurosurkit in the brain for being smart.
Rather, there are neurosurkits that are responsible for
the case in the real circuits for creativity.
Neural circuits for tasks which are not so
on and so on.
Fortunately, thesis understands this and is
developed custom neutrophics that are tailored to
your specific goals and your specific needs.
Use only the highest quality ingredients.
Things of the sort that we'll talk about in today's podcast
that's like an alpha-chipy-c, phosphoric acerine,
genica below, but et cetera.
I've already mentioned that they are customized to you.
So, as you can go to thesis, take a brief quiz and
can get a new tropic starter type.
We'll allow you to try various neutrophics in
determine which ones you like and where for you and
each ones.
Don't, I've been using thesis neutrophics customized
for me for close to six months now and can
confidently say that their neutrophics have been
a total game changer.
When go to formula, is the clarity formula.
I like to use that before.
Cognitive work and I use the energy formula to
go to formula.
To get your own personalized introphic starter,
take go online to take thesis.com slash human.
Take that three minute quiz and thesis will send you
four different formulas to try in your first one.
Again, that's take thesis.com slash human.
And use the code, human minute check out to get 10% off
of your first books.
Today's episode is also brought to us by L.O.
The moment is an electrolyte train that has all the things
you need and none of what you don't.
That means the electrolyte's salt, magnesium, potassium
in there, but it does not have sugar.
Electrolytes are key to cellar function,
particular neuronal or nerve cell function.
In fact, for an nerve cell, we have a fire action
that shows that there's the electrical signals that allow
your brain and body to work and move and think,
et cetera, you need sodium.
A lot of people don't realize that.
And while, of course, there are people out there that need to
reduce their sodium intake, these would be people with
pre-hypertension, attention and show.
Many people actually don't get enough substance,
especially people that are falling low carbohydrate diet,
drinking a lot of caffeine or eating extremely clean.
Oftentimes, those people feel better when they increase their
sodium intake and the health energy improve when they
increase their sodium intake.
I only contains the science back electrolyte ratio.
One gram of sodium 200 milligrams of potassium and 60 milligrams
of magnesium.
If you'd like to try element, you can go to drink element
that's lmnt.com slash.
You'll remain to claim a free element sample pack with any
purchase.
Again, that's drink element lmnt.com slash.
Today's episode is also brought to us by the ecstasy.
It's lead makes smart mattress covers with heating,
cooling, and sleep tracking capacity.
The reality is that it's the foundation.
Mental health, physical health, and performance.
Talk before on this podcast about the fact that there's
a direct relationship once in a temperature and
our ability to regulate the temperature.
Body temperature needs to drop by one to three
to body temperature.
Then there are further decreases in our body temperature that
allows to get into the deepest stages of sleep.
Rapid eye, I'm not going to sleep.
All the aspects of sleep that really restore a brain
and then waking up actually involves heating up for the
body temperature.
By sleeping on an insleep mattress cover, you're able to control
the temperature of your sleeping environment.
I've been sleeping on an insleep mattress cover.
Any month now, and I can tell you it is completely changed
my sleep.
I thought I was sleeping pretty well before.
And now, frankly, I don't even want to travel because I don't
want to be away from my aces.
I can't wait until hotels and Airbnb's include aces.
If you want to try aces, go to aces.com slash.
You're going to check out their new pod through cover to say $250
off as a special labor day offered now through September 11.
Aces currently ships within the USA and Canada.
And then I can begin that to atsleep.com slash.
You're going to say $250 off an insleep cover now through September.
Let's talk about focused and concentration.
You can improve your focus and concentration using science-based
protocols.
Because today's episode is mainly focused on tools and not so much
in underlying mechanisms.
Mainly going to focus on what to do and when and how to do it.
But I just want to take about three minutes and briefly
describe that as a visual image that you can put in your mind that will help
you incorporate the tools that I'll provide and that general will help
you understand at a mechanistic level how focus and concentration work.
So when I want you to imagine is an error in an error course.
Head and it has the shaft of that error.
And in the context of the neuroscience of focus and concentration,
the neurochemical system that really represents the shaft of that
error, right, the straight line is an epinephalosopositrenal.
Today I'll refer to adrenaline and epinephrine interchangeably.
Turns out that epinephrine slash adrenaline are released within your brain.
The location of the structure of neurons called focus release.
But do not need to remember that.
And for anybody from what adrenal brands and the release of epinephrine
from those two locations.
Overall, increase is an energy that increases my workness.
It does not alone increase focus.
Okay, so the reason I've assigned epinephrine adrenaline
as a shaft of the error is that if focus is the error,
there is no focus without epinephrine.
So things whether or not they're behavioral or psychological or
supplements or drugs that increase epinephrine,
or allow focus to increase their necessary focus,
but they're not sufficient to your focus.
That is, they are required by our not enough to create focus.
So we're going to need epinephrine in the equation.
Without epinephrine, there is no focus or concentration.
Now the arrow head and this metaphor for the error has represents what's in the
equation.
He is going to be represented more related to the mechanisms of a
acetylcholine, a different neurochemical that also exists in the brain
and body.
In fact, in the body it's responsible for the attraction and movement of your muscles.
But today we're talking about acetylcholine in that context,
or rather in the context of its release within the brain.
Acetylcholine is released from a couple of different locations in the brain.
And the best way to think about it is it's like a spotless spotless spotless spotless.
It highlights specific neurons, nerve cells that should be active
and more active, what should say, then other neurons in the environment.
So the reason I've assigned the arrow head to acetylcholine and acetylcholine to the arrow head
is that even you have an arrow head, it's really broad, really broad.
Imagine a mile wide arrow head.
That's not very focused on any one location, it's not really
painting any one location, isn't it?
But with a narrow, really tightly focused area,
well that's focused on one location.
So we have alertness, epinephrine, and then we have the
the action direction in which concentration and focus is placed.
And that's at least in this mental model of creating acetylcholine.
And then in order to have ongoing focus, we need another neurochemical.
And it turns out that that third neurochemical is dopant.
The molecule often associated with pleasure and reward,
but it's really the molecule of motivation.
So here I want you to imagine a your mind in arrow, arrow head,
I think acetylcholine in arrow head, my shaft or lying behind that arrow head,
which is epinephrine, I also call the adrenaline.
And then behind it, a sort of an engine that should keep that focus moving forward.
Right? Because we don't just want to focus for a moment, we don't
be able to focus for 10 minutes or an hour.
Maybe for two hours.
And there's an optimal duration to focus on teaching that and just a little bit.
But these three neurochemicals together, acetylcholine and epinephrine
and dopamine really allow you to get focus to focus very precisely and in fact,
increasingly precisely or sometimes narrow and narrow and narrow,
irrecentive, aggressively within a single doubt of focus.
And to continue to do that, we're going to be able to do that repeatedly when we're using it.
So here I'm purely talking in metaphor and in modern and mental models,
and arrows, but in a moment or two, I'll start transitioning to discussing tools,
which I'll talk about increasing dopamine and acetylcholine,
or increasing epinephrine and dopamine and various combinations with various arrow shots.
And what I'd like you to conceptualize is how those are contributing to creating a very narrowly-canted error
that has the capacity to continue moving forward over and over so that you can focus on the sharpening and as a wall.
And that's what I think was that in a slightly different way.
And of course, for those of you that want to get really down and down,
how dopamine works, I have an entire episode about dopamine motivation and drive that really gets into
neurotransmitter release and dopamine baselines and thresholds.
All of that sort of thing, we also have episodes on focus,
much longer episodes, I should say, we focus on that and incorporate a lot of the biology of acetylcholine
in terms of acetylcholine, it's also involved in neuroplasticity, et cetera.
And at Benefran, of course relates to stress and investing,
deal with the buffer stress and on and on.
Those episodes are all available to you in their long-form at ubermim lab.com.
You find the very easily they are all timestamps you can navigate to the particular topics
to most of interest to you.
I mentioned this all not as a diversion from what we want to cover today,
but I know that some of you are hungry for a lot more mechanism,
but today's episode is really mainly focused on the tools.
I will of course touch on mechanism, but if you really want to do the deep dive on mechanism,
go to humanlabs.com and you'll have more than you ever could want of the algorithm mechanisms.
Let's jump into the tools for concentration and focus.
If you want to think about tools of any kind to modify your biology,
in any way whether or not it's for cognitive function,
I'm not about exercising or eating.
Muscle and one in particular hormones need to think and understand tools in the context of modulation and mediation.
What do I mean by that?
Well, it's quite seconds.
Mediation is how specific types of chemicals and cells,
circuits that work in control very specific things in your brain and body.
Whereas modulation is the ability of chemicals and cells
and circuits to adjust how different things change,
how different things work in your brain and body,
but to do it more broadly.
What do I mean by this?
Let me give an example.
For instance, I'm going to tell you that one of the most important things
to build and maintain your focus on concentration is to optimize your sleeping behaviors.
That is to get enough quality sleep.
I would say 80% of the nights of your life.
Not everyone can get optimal sleep.
100% of the nights of your life.
Nobody, but truly nobody, goes to cheap snacks.
However, sleep has been shown in cell-rate to cognitive performance,
physical performance, hormone output, and so many other things,
in the immune system function, what we can reliably say,
why are we being at that body?
Modulate just about every process in your brain and body.
So you have to get great sensors to know to it that's going to allow you
to overcome chronic sleep deprivation and allow you to remain focused.
No pill, no device, no substance, no protocol whatsoever.
There are tools to overcome one night or maybe two nights of sleep
that's what they can talk about those.
But at a fundamental level, we need to do the things
that modulate our focus and attention in powerful ways and sleep really is that thing.
So we've done two episodes, one called Master and Sleep,
and the other episode is Perfect Your Sleep.
Perfect Your Sleep. Perfect Your Sleep is a little bit more like this episode.
More focus on protocols, Master, Sleep, and Sleep, and Sleep is protocols.
And mechanism, again, you can find those at yourbroominlab.com.
We also have a Sleep Toolkit.
It is still list of things to do in order to optimize your sleep.
I highly recommend that you download it.
But if you're in the lab.com, go to the neural network newsletter.
It is listed there. If you want, you can sign up for the newsletter,
but you don't have to. You can simply download the media up at that toolkit for a zero cost.
Why do I say Sleep Modulate Your Sleep?
Well, I'll give it an analogy.
If right now, so I'm fill the fire alarm in the building,
how to fire an analogy?
My attention, and maybe I should read it,
but it does not be on reporting as podcasts.
It would be on something else.
But what I say, the fire alarm, the media attention,
and the fire alarm is not really involved in the attention.
No, rather, they modulate my attention.
The noise in the room modulates the attention.
That's quite a bit different than a tool that I laid
or I just said you into a network.
I'll give it to you now, which is that 40-foot spinal beats
have been shown in a number of peer review studies to increase focus and concentration.
And if you'd like to access 40-hurt spinal beats in order to improve
your focus and concentration, you can do that.
You can actually get a zero cost.
You can go into the app store, you have to go to app store.
This is also available for Android phone.
There's an app called Brain Wave.
You can go there and get dialing 40-hurt,
or you can play these spinal beats.
It's been shown in multiple quality peer-wings studies.
You're playing pattern of sound waves to one ear,
and then you do the other ear, which is slightly offset
and preceding the same 17-s.
That combination of frequencies played to the different ears,
actually not just integrated into your brain centers,
and can increase focus and concentration in part by increasing levels of
a neurochemical dopamine and acetycoling,
which we talked about a little bit earlier in this
aeromodel for focus.
So we'll provide a link to that app.
I don't have any relationship to that app, I should mention.
But it's an excellent one.
It's one that I've used for many years.
There are also additional functions within the apps,
which have a sleep, and other things.
But the 40-hurt, zero-h-z, is the way
we've dealt 40-hurt stimulation has been shown
to improve focus and concentration.
Here is my recommendation the way that I use it.
I would not use 40-hurt spinal beats every time I'm doing it.
But now I know beats every time I'm doing it without work.
What I tend to do is use it for about five minutes.
I'm a wire tab and then turn it off on doing it.
I'm talking about the tools to use during that work,
whether it's reading or math, or even just emailing,
or something where I require about your focus from while.
However, there are times in which I'm in an area
or in a state of mind when feeling very distracable,
and then I'll keep the 40-hurt spinal beats on the entire time
when doing that bad product work.
Also, since I used the 40-hurt spinal beats prior to work out,
it would be a great workout for everyone
to be able to focus on a contract specific muscles.
It's a very distracable, again supported by quality per entire science,
zero-cost available out there,
not just in the brainwave app,
but in multiple apps.
I think many of you will benefit from it.
Some of you might not experience it immediately
as a total drop into a tunnel of focus
in the same way that you might with say,
the sorts of neurochemicals that we'll talk about later,
like how the GPC is the other things
that change neurochemicals directly.
But nonetheless, hurting hurts,
minor all beats are very powerful.
20-hurt spinal-frontal logic tool that
tap into your own endogenous meaning within you
or exists within you physiology
in order to introduce a C-to-Colony,
and some other methods.
And they have been shown to work quite well.
Okay, so assuming that you are sleeping well,
80% of the Knights of our life are actually working
on the various protocols and tools,
two-centive sets of them.
And you are interested in additional
tools that are sound based in order to improve
your ability to concentrate focus.
There are a lot of people you've studied,
supporting the idea that white noise
or peak noise,
or something called pink noise,
it has to do with this,
specific frequencies of sound that are in the noise,
well white noise and pink noise have been shown
to not improve concentrations per se,
but to improve people's ability to transition
into constant traded states.
So I don't tend to use white noise and people noise
while I work,
but I know people that do.
I know people that also use it called brown noise.
Folks, I know from engineering,
a computer science side,
get really into these details of white noise,
you can find white noise,
pink noise or brown noise,
listen to it through headphones or in the room.
There is indeed some data to support the fact
that white noise and some extent pink noise
and brown noise can support the release of particular
neurochemicals,
but more data showing that they can amplify
the activity and neurons,
also as a free frontal cortex,
as front areas sort of bumper
behind your forehead,
that is directly related to your ability
to direct your own focus and remain
focused on certain things.
So you have the option of how you're using
binor on it,
it's a four,
but not sharing your work that is 40 hertz lines.
It's 40 hertz,
by neurobytes throughout the network,
attempt to focus.
You also have the option,
I'm not using binorobytes,
but I'm saying,
white noise, pink noise,
brown noise,
again, there are a lot of zero-cost apps.
You can find also white noise,
pink noise, brown noise,
YouTube, YouTube,
and there's our tools that really have been shown
over and over in humans,
to allow people to focus with more depth
and to decrease the transition time.
This is a really key point,
where a lot of people are challenged
with getting into a load of focus.
None of us, however, should be expected
to just sit down and drop directly
into a state of focus.
I think that's completely an unfair request
of ourselves,
influences you wouldn't expect yourself
to go out on a track or run
and run in that one month.
You might jog for a few minutes or even walk
with where you jog and jog before you run.
Run, right, I'm putting you in that.
And if you're doing resistance training,
you can go over and load up the bar,
the machine with the maximum amount of weight
that you can move and then just drop right in.
You always do a warm-up.
And I think it's very important to understand
mental work, focus, and concentration,
as requiring that warm-up.
What is that warm-up?
No one that will end up with that warm-up
is the ramping up or the increase of
that benephrane,
a seat of slowly and dopamine.
The way that neurochemicals work
is we don't just get to flip switches
in our brain because we decide you're going to
do that.
So I think if I said that's the limit of this movie
or movies and ideas that suddenly
and I flip a switch on your arm and also
and you're going to be using laser and focus.
That is just not the way that your nervous system works.
There's a gradual dropping into
and stick to a seat.
You go from shallow sleep to deep sleep
and then out eventually.
Focus too.
You go from shallow focus to deep focus.
That is in our metaflow.
And there it's very broad.
It's a bunch of a lot of things.
And over time as we drop into focus
that neuro is narrowing the neuro and narrowing.
In fact, it's better to think about it narrowing
and then sometimes oscillating and getting wider again.
We might hear something down the hallway
or typically our fingers are narrow.
So it's a little bit too much.
You're focused is an amateur.
It is not what we call a step-flash.
It's not like you go from unfocused to focus
and then you drop into your eyes.
By understanding this dynamic,
by understanding that you are going to be continually going
in and out of the breast of the foot.
Very little is a focus.
You will greatly release the pressure on yourself
to feel focused all the time that you want to be.
This is very key people who are very good at focusing
understand this and understand that the can't
expect themselves to just immediately focus
and then snap into or out of focus.
So be patient with yourself and also understand
that focus is an ability that you can improve your ability
to focus by engaging the neural circuits
or sponsorship of focus repeatedly over time.
Through so-called neuroplasticity,
the ability of the neural resistance to change
and respond to experience.
It has a couple of different components,
but put very seriously what we repeat.
Get at standard nervous system becomes easier over time.
And the more emotionally important
and the wider something feels to us more likely
is to trigger neuroplasticity.
We're going to talk a little bit more about how to increase
neural circuits for focus later.
But right now, when you have an hand
is the key important to sleep and I will
directly to www.guburnalab.com
and the neural network newsletter to really
work on optimizing your sleep.
We've also got some tools, auditory, sound-based tools
and improving focus.
There's 40 Hertz bineral B2 used for during
about focusing concentration.
And if you don't like those or even if you do,
you might alternate them with or occasionally use
white noise, pink noise, brown noise.
Also readily available at zero.
The question I often get is,
how long should I try to focus?
The research literature point to the key importance of
the old trading, tricycle, evolved,
sort of, cadence, cycles, or circadian biology,
circcah, the day or the day,
is about 12 or 12 or 12 or 12.
And then you can operate within that day or that
in each and every day, I should say,
with 90-minute, old trading cycles.
So my suggestion would be, any time you're going to
sit down and try to focus your focus about it.
Because it's a glyccer size, skill learning,
musical learnings.
And maybe you're even just having a conversation.
Maybe you're a therapist or you're attending therapy
or a class along should it be.
And the ideal duration is about 90 minutes.
Not exactly 90 minutes, but we can rely
on, we say, 90 minutes per hour,
or at last.
It doesn't have to be the full 90 minutes.
We're trying to push yourself to be able to
drop into two hours of focus or three hours of focus,
well possible is not really in line
or that we know about the underlying lines.
Which is every step for sleep states,
with a different stages of sleep,
and our waking state is divided into 90 minutes cycles,
or sort of a trading cycles.
So what I like to have a time when I set a timer
in 90 minutes, I acknowledge any steps,
the fact that most conditions,
and I'm really impressed for a deadline,
and I'm often recaffinated, et cetera.
So first, for five to 10 minutes of that 90 minutes,
or a transition time, it's like a warm up for focus,
but I do include it in that 90 minutes.
And then I really try and drop into,
do a focused, mentally work,
or learning of some sort,
again, this could be physical as well,
and later skill learning,
the running or the top weights,
and so it's really trying to drop into that.
Across the full 90 minutes, again,
except in the fact,
it's not just an idea of the fact
that occasionally our focus will flicker,
it will jump out of focus,
and then they part of the focus
as to go back to focus.
We had to conceptualize this perhaps,
is that arrowhead suddenly getting very, very proud,
that they're focusing on many things,
or that arrow shifts to a different location in the room.
The key is to be able to shift it back
and to narrow it around again,
and that's an active process.
So much so that it requires a lot of metabolic energy.
Your brain is the chief,
a consumer of mental health energy.
Calories that you consume,
so that the patient metabolic rate,
most of that isn't related to movement or heartbeat,
or breathing,
it's related to brain function.
The brain is a lot in the water spectrum,
to color a key.
So understand that at the end of 90 minutes,
I need to have a 45 minutes.
You might feel rather tired of it,
or even exhausted,
and that's very important,
that after about a focus that you take it,
at least 10 minutes,
and ideally, in the 30 minutes,
go through what I call the leg rate of deep focus.
You really want to focus on somewhat
medial tasks or things that really don't require
it to one of your concentration.
This is starting to become a little bit of movement
out there,
and pops psychology and optimization rate.
This idea of not looking at your phone
as you walk down the whole spectrum.
Certainly not looking at your phone in the bathroom.
And I should mention,
by the way,
this is a particular annoyance of mine.
You notice this weight sometimes
for restaurants and public places,
as increased substantially in the last 10 years.
The reason for that is not to digest this,
it's not that gut-microbiom,
it might be a gut-microbiom.
But chances are it's because people are on their phones
on the bathroom,
so doing yourself and everybody else
a favor by staying on their phone
in the restaurant,
staying off your phone,
while walking down the wall,
trying to give yourself some time
to deliberately depressed
to let your mental state's idle,
to not be focused on any of the things.
That period of an idling
is essential to those really tough focus,
much in the same way that rest between sets of resistance training,
rest between exercise,
is vital timing to focus
and perform during the actual sets
or during the actual bounce of one-ing or the cycle of one-ing.
So, deliberate deep impression as you see,
and I know this is far between robbing
drawn in by the incredible rich arena
sensory information available on our phones
and other devices.
But I can't tell you the size of this is not there.
The ability to focus is not just related to what happens during the entry
and movement through those focus bounce,
but after those focus bounce,
we really need to deliberately decompress.
And of course, the ultimate deep impression,
the timing which we are not directly
or thinking of our strength is during sleep.
So, it's not one-ing or one-ing or one-ing or one-ing or one-ing or one-ing.
We're all together logically.
The fact that you're at your team,
the long-lasting duration is not controlling their mind as that
is in fact the ultimate form of restoration,
even if we have to run into a streep.
So, take that period after an hour or less focus bounce.
Remember those focus bounce,
don't have to be full 90 minutes.
Let's see, do 45 minutes of work.
Just done with it, set it down and go do something for maybe five,
ten, maybe 30 minutes.
That is functional for your day.
I just want to walk around in circles
or staring up the sky,
or if you can do that,
most of us have other things to do.
But do things that are rather automatic or reflexive,
or do a goal,
and try not to do any focus,
just reading, try not to bring your vision into a tight location,
such as your phone,
and try and deliberately decompress,
because that will allow you to drop into intense bounce of focus,
again, repeating your own piece of the drug,
and then I'm often asked how many
or trading cycles one can perform throughout the day.
That depends on how well you slept,
how well you are nourished,
which we'll talk about in a moment,
and how well trained up your focus capacity is.
And here's the paradox.
If you are very trained at focusing,
you're very good at dropping into focus,
you're actually going to need more
deliberate decompression and deep focus.
I recommend only doing about two,
maybe three deep work sessions per day.
So not one 90 minute session,
then expecting yourself to do another one,
another one, another one,
but rather one deep work 90 minute session,
and maybe another in the afternoon.
A lot of people get surprised by this and say,
wait, how many people can afford to just work three hours a day?
I'm really talking about the hard mental work.
And again, somewhat paradoxically,
that more you can concentrate,
the more deeply you can concentrate,
the fewer deep work concentration
about it can actually perform each day.
It makes sense, however,
if you think about it in the context of say,
resistance training,
if you are stronger and stronger in the gym
or you're an endurance athlete,
then you can run, you know,
ultra-maribond, 100 miles or so.
You are essentially cutting a deeper
spot into your recovery capacity,
and somebody who's not very skilled at those things
or can't perform as much intense work.
So the intensity of the work scales directly
with how long you need to rest after that work.
I at the stage of my life,
am pretty good at dropping into and maintaining
focus balance of concentration.
Provided the landscape of my life as writing,
I didn't have some burning, stressful things,
essential or emergency that I'm telling to,
and then I put my phone away or turn it off.
I can, I feel like,
90 minute focus balance per day,
but that's about the,
and between those focus balance,
I'm doing other things that require less focus.
Some of you may be able to perform,
what I highly recommend is that you try
to do it at the last times.
That is,
one 90 minute or less,
the whole focus is concentrated
in a word per day.
And yes,
that means the weekends too,
and on the weekends I like to read a book,
that's that with my phone,

or insight,
not on the device.
That's what I do.
I listen to an audiobook sometimes while taking
a really concentrating on books.
I'm trying to learn what I'm hearing and what I'm seeing.
So again, a daily 90 minute,
I start with a note after about four weeks of that.
If you're able to stay concentrated,
work through the agitation,
then I would consider increasing the number of focus back.
Again,
and not to say essentially,
30 minutes,
or your PhD advisor or your parent or your friends,
and say,

I can't really concentrate or think about anything
for the 90 minutes per day.
That's not what I'm saying.
Deep focus about,
these are about to work,
or I should say,
gentle work,
a physical work where you're really forcing yourself
to focus and be focused to sharpen your head up that area,
and head to a redirected area to the company.
It is a hard work.
I would even think about it more or less like a workout
of any current.
Before we continue with today's discussion,
we're going to take a brief pause.
To acknowledge our sponsors,
athletic green.
It's also called AG1.
I started taking athletic greens.
Way back in 2012,
I've also talked about the light of that as an expenser
of this podcast.
Athletic greens contain vitamins,
minerals, probiotics,
digestive minutes,
and a gap to fight.
So a lot of things in there.
It's actually the reason I started taking it.
It's still taking it once or twice a day.
Essentially covers all of my nutrition databases,
and the probiotics in particular are important to it,
because of the critical importance of what's called
the gut-brain access that is neurons,
and other cell types in gut.
Adjustive tract that communicate with the brain
back to their digestive tract,
in order to control things like mood,
immune function,
hormone function,
and on and on.
Whenever somebody is asked,
what's the one substance I should take?
I always answer athletic greens.
I gave that answer long before I ever had this podcast.
That's the answer I still give now
for all the reasons that I detailed just a moment ago.
If you'd like to try at that,
it dreams you can go to athleticgreens.com slash human
to claim a special offer.
That's your five free travel box.
I'm really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road.
Plus a year supply of vitamin D3K2,
which also very important for a huge number of bodily factors,
brain factors that impact your immediate long-term health.
Again, that's athleticgreens.com slash human.
I'd like to call your attention to a new and extremely useful tool
for learning and applying science-based protocols
for mental health physical health experience.
It's called Virtus.ciR10.SAA.
Inside the app, you'll find what are called journeys.
Each journey or into these specific goals, such as improving your sleep,
or tracking your sleep, or improving your ability to focus in science-based.
And being your nutrition,
or specific exercise programs.
Virtus.ciR10 makes a lot of the protocols
that you see here on the human podcast and elsewhere.
Very easy to understand this.
And in fact, it tracks your progress
with each of these protocols.
I and several other researchers have been directly involved in developing
specific journeys and protocols that you'll find within the Virtus.ciR10.
In fact, a lot of it involved in direct video tutorials for me
and others that you'll recognize from social media and for podcasts.
Everything that you'll find within the Virtus.ciR10 is geared towards
giving you the latest science in simple straightener protocols
to a mental health physical health experience.
If you want to check it out, you can go to the App Store
at the Virtus.ciR10.SAA.SAA.
Or you can go to Virtus.ciR10.SAA.com.
Virtus.ciR10.com.
I mentioned the topic of nutrition, which I'm going to go.
And of course, nutrition is a complicated topic.
In fact, one of the quickest ways to get yourself into a battle online
is to say something different in your work for your nutrition.
I just want to clear up my stance about nutrition.
I fully support and applaud those of you that are vegans for whatever reason,
those of you that are pure carnivore for whatever reason,
those of you that are omnivores for whatever reason.
I happen to be omnivore.
My goal is always to be high quality, minimally or non-processed foods.
Businesses, things and alterations are I do.
It's a neat and systems.
It's a source of resources, it's like, you start your business.
It's a machine of vegetables and I eat fruits.
I try not to eat sugars.
I don't really like highly processed foods in this program.
That's me.
That's what I do personally, not dictated me what people should eat.
I know certain people are ketogenic.
And I can say that people who achieve ketosis and get into ketosis.
Yes indeed.
There is a mental state associated with ketosis that will now you're brain to function,
distinct really clearly.
Many people find very attractive and keep them going back over and over again to a ketogenic diet.
I'm somebody who, for instance, has not been in ketosis many times in my life.
They're not going to deliberately so.
But I actually just can't concentrate on ketosis.
The further the advanced brainer physically, the answer to that.
I experience on top of nutrition that does include some carbohydrates.
There are a lot of different ways to approach all this.
Whether or not you're a vegan, eating or vegetarian, carnivore, etc.
Point is this.
Your ability to focus and in fact your ability of neurons to encode specific information in your
environment.
That is to represent what's out there in the world.
It's actually related to your blood glucose level.
Here I'm setting aside the discussion of your own self-saccharity.
It's a special exercise.
But there's a beautiful study that was published in neuron.
The long goes to the tune of that is the precision with which neurons in the brain
to represent things in our environment is actually much greater when there is a certain
disease.
Translating the English there's means that when you are fasted or when our blood glucose is very low,
we aren't able to perceive things about things as clearly.
Now there's a twist to this, however.
Many people who practice experiment on fasting and I should say, I practice a sort of pseudo-inderman
fasting.
I generally, my meals between the hours of 11am and 8pm, although sometimes there are some
people around that.
I usually have an early breakfast.
I'm not super rich, you know about it.
But I know there are a number of people who are doing a longer fast or they are six hour
hour-long.
We did an entire episode about fasting and again find that you won't let them come.
We have such a stand-up.
There's an expert in the instrument fasting podcast.
Intermittent fasting has a lot of potential benefits for some people.
It's a convenient way to restrict their calories, for other people to communicate way towards
the weight, eating.
It's easier to not eat, or then feed a small portion of the instrument fasting and so on and so
forth.
But one of the things I do not hear very often is that some people like the fasting because
they like the clarity of the mind.
You're a stitch-a-chew.
Nurons, unless you're in a ketogenic diet, really thrive when you cook, state and love
when you cook.
And as I mentioned before, your ability to think and perceive things is actually enhanced by having
sufficient glucose is an extra.
So why would it be that some people experience a heightened state of mental
clarity when they are fast and I certainly experience that.
Well, I should say that provided you well hydrated, and often you have an
of electrolytes in your system.
What tends to happen is that when you're in just food, there's a shift in your
nervous system towards a sort of parasipystetic mode.
That is, that is, and more than the last you probably heard it has,
or less than digest, although it does other things, and more relaxed mode.
That can indeed make us very sleepy.
We have too many hormonal hydrates that actually are just quite sleepy.
However, if we have, you know, if we have enough of it, that is, if our gut is full,
it diverts blood to our gut and we become sleepy and we can't focus on this.
So a lot of people really like fasting and the state of being fasted for focus and
concentration, because they don't have as much of that person-athetic activation.
They're just not as sleepy and in fact under those conditions.
Half as much caffeine will give you just as much lift.
So I just, twice as much caffeine will give you one full belly of pasta.
That's just the way that caffeine interacts with glucose.
So what I'd like you to imagine is if you had a measure of focus from zero to
terms of arboraturism, it's 10 being maximum, it's a distance zero being not focused
at all.
Imagine a U-shaped function, where if you're very fasted, you're going to have a high-degree
of focus in concentration.
But then if you ingest some food in your belly as well, your focusing concentration
is reduced.
But having enough blood glucose and maybe an elevated blood glucose will increase cognitive
function.
So there are two end systems.
One end of this spectrum of blood glucose is relatively low and you're fasted and can
thicken the behavior in a very concentrated way.
And on the other end of this spectrum, there are a lot of blood on it.
It goes to, I should say, sufficient glucose.
So you never want your blood glucose to be too high.
And that allows you to go to a high-degree.
So you sort of have to pick your conditions.
What do you want for your balts of focus in concentration?
I actually do both.
So what I do is, as I mentioned before, I eat my meal sometimes when I'm 11 a.m.
My first meal typically unless I'm very hungry when I wake up.
And so how you will do my workout and one bout focus to have a full
basis of part work for the day.
And I do that fast to be consumed water with electrolytes,
to be element to electrolytes.
Maybe some caffeine as well in the corner of your maté or coffee.
That's my first focus about coffee.
That is essentially done fast.
And then I do notice after I eat, I actually have a diminishing
capacity.
And then again, in the afternoon, I'll do another 90 minute bout of focus.
And I'll talk about some of the tools I use,
make sure that that bout of focus is optimal for getting the most
amounts of focus to work done, whether or not it's mental work for physical
work of what I tend to do my physical work.
Really.
Really.
Really.
So to make this very simple, where a simple as I can for you, being fast
is great for focusing concentration provided you're not thinking about
through the entire time.
And being fed is terrific for everybody's satisfaction.
Actually, you can be through the whole function provided that you
didn't eat too much.
So one way to manage that is if you're going to have a lunch to
make sure that you don't stuff yourself as lunch,
you're not overeating until not quite so full that you put
your nervous system into this person's head.
I know a lot of people experience a dip where you've got a crash and energy in the afternoon
that makes it real hard to focus for that reason.
I'll just remind people with a tool I talked about many times before
I've been doing some biology, but denocene,
which is to delay your first caffeine take to about 90 to 120 minutes after
waking up.
I know that can be painful for certain people.
I violate that rule when I'm working out for your morning.
I'll drink my caffeine before my workout,
which often occurs within 13 or 16 minutes of waking.
Like in general, unless I'm working out very early,
I'm going to just make a thing 90 to 120 minutes after I wake up.
So again, I want to emphasize that if you hear somebody out there say
being fast in this optimal for focusing concentration.
Well, that has true and one more text and perhaps I do a
first certain part of the day.
And other people will say, no, you know, neurons run on
glucose, you need glucose in your bloodstream in order to get those neurons
to be tuned.
That is to respond with electrical activity in the optimal way
when you're meeting something you're trying to prepare.
So that's also a chance.
And of course, you can incorporate both.
I'm going to describe incorporate both.
Fastest states and fed states in the world to others.
And as a brief note about ketosis, for those of you that actually
manage the transition into ketosis, the learning and ketogenic state
to adapt to that in general, you can enhance your inflection.
Concentration and focus because of the way in which ketones
can be used as a so-called optimal fuel for neurons.
ketogenic diet was originally designed, if you will, for epilepsy,
as a whole relationship to epilepsy controlling epileptic seizures.
And it can, in fact, allow people to achieve focused
concentrated brain states.
So in the future, I'll do an episode about ketosis and be sure to circle
back on how to optimize ketosis in the focus and concentration.
Although I have to believe that most of the people listen to this are probably
not eat ketosis or fall in a ketogenic diet.
So that's why mainly focused on faster states and fed states.
And just to make sure that I'm thorough, the fastest state to me would be
a state in which you have any ingested in these calories.
But may have ingested in that.
Maybe just more in the world.
Maybe just more in the world.
Maybe just more in the world.
Really have an ingested in any significant number of calories in the previous
four to eight or maybe even 12 hours.
And again, there's tremendous variation here depending on how long we go fast
down the average average rate of state after people wake up, et cetera.
Again, if you're interested in intermittent fasting, but if you're
segmental and physical health and performance, check out our episode
on fasting.
I also want to touch back on this idea, which is for you to keep increasing
the weight of the diet.
And I'm going to touch it on this point a bit as it relates to elimination
diets, it's a whole industry and it's kind of interesting.
Obviously, it's reason in two, what sorts of things kids in the
adults should and shouldn't even order to reduce them in the
ADHD?
I think that some total of those data point to the fact that
they do seem to feel sugar intake and certainly highly
processed foods, so ice cream, candy, chips, et cetera.
Those sorts of things really do seem to prove symptoms
to be the key of children and adults.
But let's say we have to have that, and I have to say,
the which foods can be a good thing in concentration.
Well, foods that places a full amount of tyrosine to the
precursor to drugs, and I don't know if I'm going to
get an antioxidant.
Are certainly going to increase concentration, I hope
as some of the things like Parajanchee, certain meats or
not specific look up for foods that contain high
sugar, also, so I should say, I should say,
we have a lot of different types of foods.
But do we quite directly get a lot of different things?
Whether or not you're just in foods that are rich in the
precursor of the know acids to dopamine, acetycalling, et cetera.
If we're consuming large amounts of those foods, that is,
one can look and see if I'm sensing that, a stake of foods,
a lot of precursors to acetycology.
It has amino acid precursors to dopamine as well,
but if I were to just say two rib eye steaks,
that's a lot of meat, and it will direct a lot of blood to my gut.
And it will cause me to be sleepy, and that will create
challenges of me being able to achieve states of focus
in that situation.
So the simple way to put this is, if you need to watch,
when we get very large volume of food, you are going to
diminish the focus on the pressure.
The key is to enough that nourish certain activities,
mental and physical, that you need to perform, but if you're eating large meals,
you are going to diminish your concentration,
and increase your concentration period.
I know many people are curious as to whether or not caffeine
can improve focus and concentration.
And indeed, it can.
There is an immense amount of weight of supporting the idea that caffeine
provided by consuming those appropriate dosages can improve mental
performance and physical performance, and it largely does that.
That's the importance and focus and concentration.
The dosages of caffeine, of course, is that
caffeine that one helps caffeine adapt to that,
and that's caffeine tolerance you have.
And that is going to very tremendously, depending on whether
that you adjust that caffeine with that food,
that you're going to have to go to earlier.
But there is a kind of general range,
which we'll talk about caffeine, as being useful for this
and the range is basically from 100% to 100%
to 100% when a caution everybody out there.
You're somebody who's a person who's a person who's a diet,
and you're a panic attacks.
I mean, I don't use a gym to just stay caffeine run out
and just 400 milligrams of caffeine in the form of espresso
or your vermote or an energy drink or pill form,
that is going to be very uncomfortable for you.
You're saying, you're adopting a caffeine,
if you're not already caffeine and after.
But most people do quite well to adjust 100 to 200 milligrams
of caffeine prior to doing some focused work.
And again, I recommend delaying your caffeine and take 90 to 120 minutes
after waking unless you're using that.
You have to make the jolt in your system.
You should have to eat with that.
That's the most people in just your coffee or my particular favorite
I told guest caffeine is your vermote.
It is important, and I should note that you should effectively avoid
the smoke versions of your vermote as they control a person
of genetic cancer, monitoring compounds.
There's some great, your vermote brands out there that
cost effective away to consume it would be to use the lucrative tea
and to pour water over that because one particular brand that I like
I don't have any affiliation to the whole.
So, ever using it for years as a man of park, it's an organic brand
that is solid, I don't find my own Amazon being
defined at a swanly intern and as well.
Again, I don't have any affiliation to them.
It's just very causal.
I've learned that I've been a community, it does have a smoke flavor
at least a little bit of the I-Buy smoke varieties
and other than the recent genetic compounds are in there at least
that are the rare of growth.
And I like the way I taste and it provides a very uneven lift
and stimulant that I think certainly works for me
and that a number of people I know are just in the same choice.
Your vermote, your caffeine, also have other additional
aspects in particular the caffeine and your vermote.
Another source is the caffeine, and other sources
can be a neurodegenerative effect.
That is the...
Increasing motivation and drive.
I tend to suggest caffeine really in the day I tend to cut off
what I have to and take somewhere in or to the end to ensure
that I can get into a certain night sleep.
But I realize that there are people out there that just
caffeine is laid as two or three in the afternoon
and it can still sleep fine.
The real caution, those of you that think that you can drink caffeine
in the evening or nighttime is to fall asleep.
All of them are just a little bit of a kind of
nervous effect of your sleep and the depth of your sleep
and the depth of your sleep is a bit of a kind of a kind of a
full day of sleep.
The sleep you're getting is simply not as good as the sleep
in the afternoon or afternoon.
The short Oscar caffeine is the same.
At least eight hours each week and that time
and I'd feel like I can't even 12 hours before that.
But of course there are factors and strengths as well.
Okay, so caffeine is increasing dopamine's function
by changing the number and efficacy of dopamine or sacros.
Of course it also increases our wakefulness or alertness.
And that is largely through the neurochemical systems
related to it.
Genocene, which is the molecule that builds up in our brain and body
the longer we are awake.
It's part of the sleepiness system, if you will.
Makes us feel fatigue or tired.
And caffeine also operates on the epinephrine
of the adrenaline system.
If I can't read just too much caffeine,
sometimes get the jitter.
If jitters are really the sympathetic
as it's called, your system's bias,
and our pupils will dilate.
I should get water.
Now, somewhat paradoxically,
when our pupils get bigger, the pupils of our eyes
that is, our visual world actually narrows
about what we're talking about.
Our people realize that's one of our pupils are really small
that mean that we are relaxed.
So if you're a sea-saving, really tiny,
sort of, so they go pin-sized pupils, they are very relaxed.
If their pupils are very big, they're dilating.
Well then they are very amped up.
They are very, very alert.
caffeine increases the nervousness by increasing
the epinephrine and the adrenaline waves.
It's been written within the body.
So that's another way that it facilitates focus
and concentration.
There are other ways to increase epinephrine and brain body
besides cady, stimulants.
And in fact, that has been studied.
There's an excellent study that is carried out.
Not that long ago on how stress itself
can increase our abilities to focus and concentrate.
That's right.
How stress itself can increase focus and concentration.
You know, most people think of stress as they're carrying
her ability to focus, but that's actually an actual
which is a stress.
It involves the deployment of an e-simmocous adrenaline.
Up and up for it.
And that adrenaline changes our visual field.
In other words, it narrows our vision to a different tunnel
like the focus that is at least a hero in our metaphor
of the hero of North Shark.
And the impreence of our concentration.
It just makes sense given what we know about stress.
When we're stressed, we tend to be stressed about
a specific thing.
We start anticipating or wondering,
thinking about what's going to happen next.
What led up to this?
How is this going to happen?
How do I feel right now?
It really narrows the context of our thinking and our behavior.
It's one of my favorite studies that really illustrates
stress and the concentration.
It's one that was published not that long ago.
And I will provide a link to this in the show notes.
It's a paper published in the Journal Experimental Psychology
in 2020.
The title of the paper is,
surprisingly, acute stress improves concentration performance
for a storthy degree in EGRO-O-T-E.
And the study involves taking a number of subjects
that are stressing the round to go nuts prior to the cognitive
concentration task.
And there are a lot of data in this paper,
but I'm just going to move in on one specific set of data.
I mentioned it as a greater than measured things like cortisol,
stress hormone, the measured anxiety.
It's quite thorough studies.
And what they found was that concentration performance
improved many of the...
from greater than double-alt of concentration performance
in the stress-press.
And stress in this context was provided using a standard way
of reducing stress-press levels of the study.
So it's pretty stuck at the Institute of Laboratory
and they have to either do something fairly mundane.
In the control group, or they have to do a simulated job
in every level of the system.
So this is a bit of a sense of...
...traumatized in any kind of way.
This is fairly low levels of stress.
That rate is there levels of up and up for it.
And we know this from the study.
And the levels of cortisol and other stress hormone
modestly within their brain and blood.
But that even modestly increase in these stress hormones
and the cordyological levels of stress
in the brain and the blood pressure.
This may come as surprising to see
many people think that stress-free
the minutious cognitive levels of stress increase cognitive performance.
Now of course there are other ways to increase stress levels
and to do that in any way is to improve concentration
and to do that.
And one of the best ways to do that
is to do that is to do that.
Because it's so sure fire and it's generally safe.
Provided you do it safely.
It is the liberal cold exposure.
This is something I've talked about on the podcast before.
But the liberal cold exposure can be achieved by getting into a cold
shower for one to five minutes.
You're not used to it.
You're probably going to start with one minute.
Or you can get into a nice bath.
And nowadays there are a number of different commercial sources
of circularly cold water.
Or if you have access to a body of water
that getting into cold water under cold water
greatly increases epinephrine levels
and dopamine levels in the brain and blood.
It's a beautiful study that was published in the European
Journal of Physiology.
She could show that increases in dopamine
and acetate.
And you're doubling your morph
of dopamine levels that are very long-lasting for hours.
And epinephrine levels are less so it's the way
that it's important.
Not just immune system, but also immune system.
It's important to be patient with HIV-shad
and rude because it does that.
But it can really improve concentration.
I touched on this a little bit in an episode about the memory
that there's an age-old practice
of dating back to the living full times.
Putting people into cold water right after the liberal
and suddenly in order to spike to increase their epinephrine
as a way to consolidate those memories.
For sake of today's discussion,
if you're interested in ways to improve focusing concentration,
you need to increase your epinephrine.
You're adrenaline.
Cold water exposure is one of the most efficient ways
to do that.
This is not a bio-hack.
I don't like the word hack.
I know it's commonly used, but a hack is something
where you're using one thing for a different purpose
and it was originally intended to be in here.
You're not referring to the shower
or the robot or something.
Epinephrine is an aerochemical
that will place your vision into more of a tunnel mode
which will allow you to focus on cognitive work
or physical work in a more specific way
and not going to be as distractable.
It's very easy to achieve
if I get into a cold shower or body of water
for a brief period of time.
People always ask how long
to get under a cold water
and how cold to make it.
There's a thing.
They should be uncomfortably cold
but safe to stay in for one to five minutes.
So uncomfortably cold,
I really want to get out
but safe this day and not so cold
that's going to be a hardback.
And not so warm that it's comfortable
and it doesn't create that adrenaline in this.
Cold water exposure, I should say,
the liver, cold water or non-deliber cold water exposure
reliably increases in epinephrine levels.
It is incredibly useful as a tool for this
and it is in fact zero cost or even
negative zero cost.
Very good and so fast.
Well, you can certainly save on your heating bill
by taking out full of shower.
So that's one thing.
And for those of you that have access to devices
or locations we can get into cold water
you can submerge the natural.
For those of you that don't
maybe take your cold bath
and get into your neck.
That's going to be most efficient.
Because as you can't do that,
you'll get under that one chair.
Again, it should be uncomfortably cold
because at the point where you want to get out
you have to safely stay in for one to five minutes.
How long should you do it before you work
about? Well, if you get into
really cold water,
uncomfortably cold,
and get out after about three minutes,
you're probably good to go.
You dry off and get it to work.
Some of you might think,
this is a little bit silly as a tool
for focusing concentration.
But if you look at the data on
epinephrine and out,
carefully, you can increase focus.
You'd be very impressed.
Certainly can increase
one's ability to attend
this specific discharge stimulus
or for reading or math work,
etc. It's going to be very useful.
Of course, you don't want to make it so cold
that you're shivering and shattering the whole time.
And of course, you could,
if you like combined this with 40 Hertz
by the receipts, there's no reason
why you couldn't combine the two protocols.
But the point here is that a lot of people
would love to, and I think,
ought to leverage the health promoting
and powerful effects of increasing
epinephrine on focusing concentration.
And running out and getting out
stressed by life events,
we're getting into an argument or something like that.
Simply as a way to increase focus,
the concentration doesn't seem
method-daptive to me.
So, deliver cold exposure as a straightforward
and do that.
It doesn't involve any one of
the health sites, because it could do
something else, but it doesn't require
any else.
And again, there are zero low
and even negative cost ways to approach.
If you'd like to know how long the positive effects
of epinephrine last,
toward improving focus and concentration,
if we look to that study from the group
and all the acute stress imposed
called that performance study,
they measured concentration before
and 30 minutes after the stress was increased.
And there does appear to be a quite low
and lasting, really, up to an hour
or more effect of increasing epinephrine.
How might you apply these sorts of protocols
early in the day, or later in the day?
Well, one suggestion or one potential protocol
would be, I'm going to sit down and do some work.
If you're already for an alert and focus,
no need to reach to this tool,
but if you're feeling like your focus and alertness
isn't quite where you'd like it to be,
you can take a three minute, very cold shower,
or some of yourself in cold water for three minutes
coffee as well.
And then some of that work,
maybe even throw in the 40 hertz binary beats.
All of that would be layering in
a different systems that are different
or lower chemicals, such as
cedar calling up enough for any dopamine
that are going to lend themselves to a really terrific 90 minute
board less.
Now I'd like to discuss time with the purely behavioral tools
that quality peer reviewed science say can improve
focus and concentration significantly.
At the beginning of today's episode,
I talked about the study from Dr. Wendy Suzuki's lab,
where they explored a 13 minute meditation
done every day for a period of eight weeks.
That meditation led to significant improvements
in focus and concentration ability,
as well as other aspects of cognitive performance.
It also improved mood and reduced stress.
You might be wondering,
what exactly is that's why the test runs?
Meditation is very simple.
It's one that anyone can perform.
What you would want to do is set a timer
for about a 30 minute.
I don't think it has to be exactly 13 minutes,
but since that's what they answer to the study,
you would set a timer for 13 minutes
or sit or lie down,
close your eyes,
and you would simply focus on your breathing.
Most people are going to benefit from only doing that
reading through their nose,
but if you have some sort of obstruction
or inability to read,
just through your nose,
you could probably also do it by reading through your nose,
and mouth or just your mouth.
But ideally you would do just nasal breathing
for a period of 13 minutes,
concentrating on breathing,
and concentrating,
or bringing your awareness,
your social interreceptible awareness
if you want to get really technical about it.
Interreceptible awareness
to a point just about an inch inside of your forehead.
Now of course,
I might say I'm kind of gory to some of you
never actually been in size arms.
Your forehead,
but just about an inch behind your forehead
is where you would want to place your concentration
while also concentrating on your breathing.
Here's the thing about meditation.
That all studies of meditation show.
Just that unless you're very experienced
meditation,
your concentration,
your focus will drift away from your breathing.
10 seconds,
every 20 seconds,
maybe even every five seconds,
but an important part of such a meditation
practice through proof concentration and focus
is that you are continually refocusing
back to that specific location
and you focusing back on your breath.
This is something that, again,
is not often the focus that is
in human concentration,
and you're supposed to concentrate on your breath.
But if you mind drift,
the society will sail this meditation,
but actually that's not the case.
A huge component of improving your ability
to focus and concentrate
by a real mental process of rewiring the circuits,
but that's a consequence of the focus.
Is the repeated return to a state of focus
from a state,
non-focused or diminished focus?
So think about it,
like trying to drive down the three way,
and stay in between the live
laymen's teaching,
and everyone's in a while
because there's a bit of drift on the vehicle,
maybe the wheels aren't aligned correctly,
or there's something else
all at the chassis you're steering device,
and it starts to drift right a little bit,
and you get the rumbles drift
or then you pull back to the center.
That's really what
a focused meditation practice is about,
as opposed to
expecting yourself to stay between the mental lane lines,
so to speak.
So if you're somebody who's going to do a practice
of the sort that I describe
13 minute meditation practice every day,
you'd always consider,
like down close your eyes,
start to concentrate on your breath,
focus your attention,
on a location about it,
inch behind your forehead,
and then fully expect that it's going to be thinking about something else,
and that's a cue to focus back to that location,
just about it,
inch behind your head and back to your path.
By doing that repeatedly over and over,
what you're really training on is
the network after the main brain
that indeed includes that pre-fencedal cortex
that you're focusing on,
as well as some other structures,
the inferred temporal cortex,
deep hippocampus,
and structures,
as you would memory,
and other components of the neural circuits
that are involved in directing,
or a major focus concentration.
Again, I can't emphasize your importance
so this practice being one of focusing and refocusing,
in fact, I prefer to close such a focus,
and refocus, focus meditation,
or a constantly refueling,
or maybe the focus of the better need for it,
and the more important things.
But this sort of meditation practice,
as I know,
is a skill that's not focused on other studies,
to really improve people's mobility.
So much so,
but in the first verse,
our third state for a describe,
another example,
is a little bit longer than the,
the mid-automatic,
about 70 minutes,
and that will be a significant amount of time.
That's quite a long time in my opinion.
The point here isn't how long you focus,
or somehow trying to achieve total focus
for the entire 15 minutes,
or 17 minutes,
or 16 minutes,
about a meditation.
While that would be wonderful,
and I think many people aspire to do that,
that's a lot of hard mental work.
I think for most people out there, including myself,
a relatively short meditation practice of about 13 minutes,
in which you fully experience
your focusing concentration to drift,
but that you're continually refocusing,
is going to be the most effective.
Yes, the most effective,
the focus,
that's a great idea.
I invite you to an introvert every time
that you focus off that location
about one inch behind your forehead,
as an opportunity to refocus and think about the refocusing,
as the trigger for teaching your mental circuits
out of focus for extended periods of time.
As a bonus to that sort of meditation practice,
the study from when you see Zuki's lab also shows
that people experience inclusive,
sweep and improvements in memory.
So not just improvements in mood and reduction in stress,
and movements in focus and concentration,
but all these other positive benefits
from just doing that 13 minute-a-dake meditation practice.
It's one that I've started to adopt
and have felt tremendous benefit from
and I encourage many of you to try.
The one cautionary note is the one that I mentioned at the beginning
of the episode, which is because the refocus
is a little bit of a meditation,
it does involve a significant amount of effort
and engagement of these prefrontal political circuits.
It is disruptive to sleep if performed too closely to sleep.
So if you are going to do that practice,
I recommend you not do it within the four hours prior to your presentation.
Earlier I mentioned that I would talk about ways
to improve focus if you are sleep-depressive.
This is something that I'm all familiar with.
I put a lot of effort into optimizing my sleep
that's something that with each passing year,
I put more and more effort into again
because sleep is so vital for mental health physical health.
It's all kinds.
But certainly when my role as a student in my role as a professor
and in my role in life,
I've had numerous times in which I simply did not get enough sleep
and my sleep was terrible for that of a reason.
And yet I still had a work to answer, social demands, etc.
One practice that I'm very afraid of allowing
to focus better and better
while I'm in a condition of sleep deprivation
is so called non-sleep-depressed or NSD-O.
This is also what the surrogate is.
You can need to read the yoga sleep.
You can read the yoga-needra as a child.
9 down for 10 to 30, sometimes I'm going to sleep in a 30 to 60 minutes.
You listen to a script.
It's audio script.
It takes you to the progressive sleep relaxation.
It involves a body scan, something like that.
So reading, it is very restorative in the sense
that one turns to a verge from a yoga-needra
and the R feeling greatly refreshed compared to
how you felt prior to it.
The R is also terrific.
We're imaging data from rash laboratories.
Denmark showing that there's a restoration of dopamine levels.
And after the R, the R, the yoga-needra,
whether or not you call it yoga-needra or R,
and the R, which is a little bit higher for child access.
You can find these scripts at zero-cost multiple places.
You can find there are apps that are NSTR,
yoga-needra, apps.
There is a NSTR protocol.
We'll always put out their mind.
A maid for, which is on YouTube, and two can access.
The free here is a NSTR, where actually it's a number of NSTR protocols.
The purchase in app, there are again,
number of different places that one can access.
NSTR protocols.
I do NSTR for 10 to 30 minutes per day.
Every single day I have to speak to five.
I happen to be speaking to five.
I would extend that NSTR to 30 for 60 minutes.
And when you do that NSTR, you get that number of minutes.
Time for the NSTR.
When I have in sub-well, when I'll try and do this five up
quite a place where I can do NSTR for 30 or even 60 minutes,
sometimes I won't fall back asleep here in that NSTR.
That's fine.
I think that's what most people will stay.
Witchering the NSTR, and then I'll emerge from that and go about my day.
If in the afternoon, I'm very fatigued because of lack of sleep,
but might do another NSTR of 10 to 30 or 60 minutes.
And then in another room.
Again, NSTR is something that you should read.
Every day I talk about this.
So it's more maybe too sleep because it can help you get better at
controlling and staying in a certain state.
In addition to healing restorative in that immediate timeframe.
The day in which you do it, NSTR, so it's an NSTR,
so it's an NSTR for sure.
It's very as times of various purposes.
But here within the context of trying to concentrate on
the focus of your sleep, the press, NSTR,
okay, we're going to need to focus in a NSTR.
NSTR, mentally beneficial practice.
They're growing a mental quality science.
We're going to do these chemical replenishing effects.
Imagine we could go to the mean.
But also, the potential NSTR,
to be at least in the NSTR.
We've never wanted anyone to try to live as NSTR's
at a total replacement.
There's not a lot of other conditions.
We cannot go to NSTR's, but we're going to faster it.
I am aware of a career ability to focus in the concentrated
period of our purpose.
If you were trimming your NSTR and not wearing some caffeine,
you'll notice even the radiocopacity for
focus on concentration throughout the reasons
directly related to caffeine.
So again, NSTR, the general general important
is to maintain your ability to sleep,
and it's a tool that you can use in your two compensator.
It's to sum to the compensator and loss sleep
when you need to focus.
One thing that really contrasts NSTR and yoga
is you're going to focus meditation
to talk about a few minutes of the 13-minute meditation.
Is that during the 13-minute meditation,
you're actually trying to refocus and focus
whereas during NSTR and yoga,
you're actually trying to argue focus.
So you can think of the 13-minute meditation
for your focus and focusing as directly
tapping into and mediating improvements
in the circuitry for focus, for the concentration.
Whereas you can think of NSTR and yoga
and yoga, knee-draft, and as largely
you'll bring in body state to allow you
to focus and concentrate better.
And when another tool that you can use
to directly tack into the circuits for
focus and concentration and to greatly accelerate
neural plasticity and improvement
to actually say the changes in those circuits
that will allow you to focus and concentrate better
is hypnosis.
A lot of people here have noticed
and they have exchange of noses
and people who are squawking like chickens
and doing things against their will.
But actually hypnosis is a typical
but highly-extractable,
and it's been studied by a lot of rigor
at Stanford University School.
It's medicine by my colleague,
but it's being a big, independent guest
on this podcast previously.
The noses in here need to be a good thing
because it's one in which you're a good thing.
You can't please focus and you're deeply relaxed.
So to just sort of set up the array of practices
here so you can think about the logic.
The focus refocus meditation is...
I'm going to focus.
and as DR and yoga and knee-draft
are aimed at deep relaxation.
Hypnosis is as at-tipically very complicated
to keep you in mind high levels of focus
and deep relaxation.
It's a little bit of a tough one
to just take one seat.
Unfortunately, there's a tool based on a lot of reality
that you've heard from.
Another labs, and that is the reveriac
are EVNDR-I.
The reveriac is available for no cost
and it makes for a period of time
and I think they place certain elements
of it behind the table.
But you can try it.
It's available for apples soon.
I think also to be available for Android.
And they have specific hypnosis protocols
that you listen to.
These are very brief places.
Follow the instructions.
You're listening to a particular audio script
that David's begle himself.
And some progressive breathing
and actually some fire networks
that directly went to the neural circuits
that allow for these highly focused reflexes.
And there are components within the reveriac
specifically geared toward improving focus and concentration.
So again, there's meditation for me.
There's deliberate deep compression
and a standard of medra, which is a huge impact
in the relaxation.
And then hypnosis is this very special,
very directed state of highly focused and highly
highly relaxed, actually, deeply relaxed
that allow access to the neural circuits
for focusing with concentration.
It allows you to tune those up and turn and prove those
very significantly in a very brief amount of time.
Again, some of those hypnosis scripts are a short
as eight minutes, some are as long as 13 minutes.
So what we're really talking about here
are zero-positive, that directly tap into the neural circuits
and components within your brain that allow for deep relaxations,
allow for deep focus and prove your ability
to focus and concentrate for the first time.
But certainly, by repeating those,
often you need to repeat the reveriac hypnosis
for focusing concentration before you see benefits.
Well, that will vary from person to person.
I use it once every school is worth it.
And then it's for entrepreneurs benefits from it.
And then you need to know since there are a lot of data
to support this, you have re-appened protocols within it.
How long you have to do NSTR before you experience those benefits?
There are, I would say, a first time, and every time
because it's so deeply relaxing that you were trying to
put your foot towards relative to how you went into it.
And as I mentioned earlier, the study on meditation
and addition of three weeks to three weeks,
five weeks or two, that study, but they didn't observe shorter time points.
So I highly encourage people to explore meditation
and to get to our focus.
And we focus also as we are on the monkey breast, aka yoga medra,
and the reveriac, specifically, that you can notice
within the reveriac that's geared towards improving focus and concentration.
All of these have terrific signs.
Support them, this is not loose signs or hacks.
Or just something that people came up with.
This is all grounded in work from some of the best universities
in the world, from excellent groups who are underlining their mechanisms.
And measure things with a lot of rigor, et cetera, et cetera.
And the tools are available to you.
I highly recommend that you use them.
And if you're interested in optimal time of day to do these,
you'll already mention that the focus, refocus meditation
shouldn't be done to place the sleep.
The reveriac, no-sister, scooses.
App can be done at any time.
Really, in fact, there's a component of falling back asleep in there.
I know there's a hypnosis specifically geared toward helping people
teach themselves to fall back asleep and wake up in the middle of the night.
NSDR and NSR, first thing in the morning, in the afternoon,
the time of day.
And in fact, sometimes do that in the middle of the night.
It might happen to wake up and need to get back to sleep.
Really, these tools can be applied by most any time of day,
except for that one caveat about the focus refocus meditation,
not being done with the two places.
Now, there's another set of behavioral tools that can really help
enhance the ability to focus.
Those are visual-based tools.
The tools I'm about to describe are actually being employed in numbers,
schools in China and elsewhere, in order to teach children
to focus better and for longer periods of time.
The key principle here is that much of our cognitive focus,
as I would be thinking about something in a very specific way,
and stay focused on it to read or to follow a line of conversation
and a map, use it, et cetera, et cetera.
It is going to be directed by our visual system.
Visual system has two forms of attention and focus.
One is overt focus, which is very straightforward
if I'm making a particular map of my pen,
as you were sitting right now, and I'm giving a particular map.
And so, overt focus, focusing on it with my eyes.
And of course, the rest of my brain then will follow and start to analyze
the details of what I'm seeing the contours of the pen, et cetera.
It seems sort of obvious when you're serious,
but our cognitive focus is the follow or visual focus.
That's also why they put blinders on horses.
That's also why sometimes we're at a 30 or a hat
or limiting your visual field in some way.
Because it helps you enhance your cognitive focus,
it can help minimize distraction or just not seeing as much.
It's also why we just have seen or any kind of stimulant,
but we are stressed as and our people's dilating high-altime
or vision between some of their tunnel light,
like they say, a soda straw, be with a world,
or looking through a tunnel, your focus, your vision,
because it's actually driving your cognitive focus,
your cognitive focus is narrow,
and it would be if you were seeing the whole scene that you're at.
So when you hear this, it's not a job, it's a problem.
But when you're at a level of,
who do many scientists, it's just not obvious not to see the kids.
Or that is the case, your visual focus drives your cognitive focus.
What is a practice that has been studied in various laboratories,
and that's being employed in various schools,
is to have children or adults visually focus on one location
for a given period of time, and how long,
anywhere from 30 seconds to four minutes,
and believe in a set of events as a long time
focus of one location, if you were to try that right now,
you'd probably find it to be a bit of a strain,
but if you're going to try it, you can keep in mind
my thoughts are allowed to blink.
But also keep in mind that meditation,
the refocusing practice that we talked about earlier,
that the refocusing is the key component of teaching yourself
or your brain, or your brain, your brain,
to teach yourself how to focus better.
So if you're going to incorporate this practice,
what you would want to do is pick a location,
and it could be in your computer.
In front of you, I'll go ahead and encourage it to not
edit the contents of your computer screen.
You might just want to blank your screen,
my one foot of pizza paper with a cross hatch.
There are any sort of visual target,
or you can imagine a visual target,
and then focus your visual attention on that target,
and try to breathe normally, try and stay relaxed,
and certainly allow yourself to blink
so that your eyes don't dry out.
This is not a test of how you're going.
I can go without blinking.
By focusing on that particular location,
and by forcing yourself to refocus on that location,
anytime you're gazing or vision-dreams from that location,
you are in a regenerative circuit circuit,
to get better, focusing for a longer,
and you're going to refocus when your focus shifts
off of that location.
This is incorporating under a circuit,
including the prefrontal cortex,
the effect of frontal eye feel.
For those of you curious about this other biology,
this practice is recruiting the sort of elements
of your so-called prefrontal cortex,
and to eye feel, it's richer locations.
Now far from the prefrontal cortex,
the right moment,
deliberately directing against particular locations.
Space, outer space,
could do this focusing on the solar space,
but in visual space.
Now, I mentioned before that this is a
virtual focus in the attention.
You are overtly looking at that location.
The one also very powerful practice,
improving focus in concentration,
is to use the covert.
The covert focus is where we engage my eyes
on it, so I'm not in a location such as my pan.
But my focus is actually directed elsewhere
in the room or location that I'm in.
My mind, my mind,
to some extent,
my peripheral vision is focused,
in this case, on the door,
just to my left and the room that I'm in.
That takes a little bit more effort,
this is something that all of the primary
subsystems,
or is it primates,
or able to do.
And it probably evolved as part of the mechanism
by which animals could evaluate
our sense,
evaluate predators, evaluate other primates.
Well, not necessarily certain the direct leads,
so they can obtain information,
we can obtain information without having
to react our gaze specifically to a location,

to obtain information from multiple locations,
and meet we can.
Without getting too far down there,
we're a habit of how vision and cognition
relate,
the idea,
and we can get through it and
we can get through it and we can get through it.
So let's say,
we're going to be a process of focusing on the tools
that can be incorporated to improve focus
about the situation,
here's what I recommend.
Set yourself on your level with your actors
and set a timer and try to focus on one location for 30 seconds,
and that's it for that day.
The next day,
you might have five seconds,
and then the next day,
five seconds after that.
If you misadate an oblique deal,
simply to the practice,
the same amount of time that we did,
the last time that we did the practice,
and then drag your edge,
and then increase the amount of time that you focus on one visual location,

I'm looking directly at that location.
If you like,
if you feel you have the ability,
you can try and do this through covert,
attention and focus,
by looking straight forward,
for instance,
and attending to something in the corner of the room,
and trying to do that 30 seconds,
and it's one that's quite a bit harder,
and extending that five seconds every time you do the practice.
This is something that I don't think you necessarily have to build up to being able to do for a full hour,
in order to extract the benefits.
In fact,
the best way to think about this process is as a means to get into a focused state.
If you remember back that,
an hour or so ago,
I was talking about focus states,
and not drop all the way in,
and then exit type for the homework.
We don't just drop in,
but we don't drop into the people's performance of the work out.
We're going to get them up.
So when I recommend being having a 30 second to three minute period at the beginning of about a focus,
we're going to be working for our professor for work,
and anchoring your vision to one location somewhere in the room,
or if you want to do it covertly,
you can do that.
Setting a timer and trying to do that for anywhere from 30 seconds at three minutes,
doing means when you exercise your process.
This is you are ramping up neural activity within the neural circuits that create focus and concentration.
Then,
drop the count of that location or that covert location,
and then I would move towards that you're trying to do whether
mental work or physical work.
And if about halfway through your time in the battle,
or at some point in your time in your time in your time,
you feel that your concentration is drifting,
rather than looking for a phone and scroll through
the thousands of contexts that exist within social media or your phone,
try just pick out location again and roll focusing back on that location,
using that as a ramp up to then drag your focus back towards the right train.
So it's a rep that you're not even forming after running,
you might do this,
recycling, you might do this,
my focusing on a particular location and really homing in on that location.
Physically,
this is a practice that we have about what to use in fact,
and if you're a say,
do a musical practice or math,
well then you want to focus on something other than the task that you're trying to perform.
But again, using visual features that you're doing in the plan,
but you can increase your overall ability to focus in constant trade
and then apply that to whatever it is that you're trying to earn.
Next I'd like to talk about compounds that can improve concentration and focus.
These are most often consumed as supplements.
Some of the my shits are also derived food.
Again, I just want to remind you that there are things in this case compounds that can
modulate biological mechanism that is,
can modulate focus and concentration,
and there are compounds that can mediate,
can directly contribute to concentration and prejudice.
One of the key compounds that supports concentration and focus,
because it generally supports mood concentration and focus and brain function.
General, are the omega-3 essential fatty acids.
Talk about the omega-3 essential fatty acids.
Ride of calories, carbohydrates,
carbohydrates, depression, all sorts of meat,
they're interesting data.
And it's really clear that getting somewhere between one and three months
ram is the GPS.
That is one of three grams of EPA essential fatty acids per day.
Can improve outcomes that is can improve mood and can improve cognitive function.
While there's some debate about whether I can improve cardiac function,
it's very clear at least to me that ingesting one to three grams of EPA
central fatty acids per day is beneficial.
But again, in the context of focus and concentration,
in modulate internal circuits and brain function,
that are going to support focusing concentration.
It's not as if taking one to three grams of EPA essential fatty acids per day
is going to tap directly back to only the central,
or against the focus and concentration.
That said, and as discussed on the episode,
it's over the podcast with Dr. Ramaphatric,
and the episode on ADHD that I did,
and on the episode on depression that I did,
I make it a kind of three-cas,
one to three grams of EPA's per day.
You can get those EPA's face.
Other sources are side-suffering substances.
But supplements are going to be the easiest way to do that.
You do that through liquid form,
and they'll probably live around some of it.
We begin the next four other sources of EPA's.
You can find those out there.
Certainly, some people even use prescription EPA's
to get the dose.
It's really high.
Dr. Ramaphatric, Dr. Ramaphatric,
Dr. Ramaphatric, about the same episode
with me, that's actually something that she does.
I don't take the prescription for them.
I get them through pill form through our supplement of cellulate,
which is momentous.
But, but there are a number of different quality sources
of EPA's out there.
And some of those quality sources also include things like fatty fish,
algae, and things of that.
So I'll leave it to you as to whether or not
you're supplement with omega-3 fatty acids
and where they get that one or three grams per day or whether
you do it through food.
But I would encourage you to try and function that thresholds
because they're a number of known positive effects
for those in brain function generally.
The other thing that can positively function,
and it actually measures as a fuel for neurons to function,
and can improve cognitive performance and particularly
within the brain circuits, such as the prefrontal cortex
that are involved in concentration and focus,
is pre-atthee, I know many people are familiar with
creatine-monohydrate for its effects on muscle growth
and strength and performance.
But it's quite clear that the bulk of scientific studies
have examined the role of creatine in the clinical context
and as its role in improving cognitive performance.
So my readup of literature has led to a practice
in which I ingest five grams per day or day
of creatine-monohydrate to a standard thing that's available
in just generally available.
It's a powder that's not my type of creatine powder
on my outer water, and I have letter readings or some sort of
electro-like drink.
But whatever I create happens to be convenient to adjust that
and the time of day doesn't really seem to be important.
Some people are strongly believed in consuming
creatine-postwork out, the artificial ice simple
to take it or an important post-work out
it depends on when I remember to take it.
But that five grams of creatine per day, in my case,
it's highly as a matter of course, muscle growth or strain
through performance as much as gears toward
tapping into the creatine phosphate system within the brain
and specifically the benefits of creatine for prefrontal
core of the networks.
Again, modulating, not directly me being
but modulating in generally such-or-day,
the brain that works better going to allow me to generate
focus and concentration.
It's much like sleep, like a meditation pad.
The acid is three to three times a day,
and it's generally support brain function,
which will generally support concentration focus.
Now, in terms of compounds that are specifically
some media to teach the concentration focus,
we have to go back to that arrow and add a four model
that we talked about at the beginning of the episode
that included epinephrine, then a drone, a citocolene,
which actually is this intentional spotlight.
In fact, citocolene elevated levels of citocolene
have been shown over and over again.
It's a beautiful work for my mersinix lab,
ctoca lab, and ctoca lab.
He used intonation and a number of other labs including
Y-mermers lab, cerovine, again,
again, into improved or even directly
great behavioral plasticity,
by increasing focus directly.
It's a lot of words too, but basically,
what happens is if citocolene transmission
is increased, you'd be transiently within the brain.
There's a greater opportunity for your
new plasticity in place.
And the reason there's a greater opportunity for
neuroplasticity, aka learning,
to replace cis, is by way of the increased focus
that spiking citocolene can provide.
As I mentioned earlier, there are a number of different
foods, each contains calling, and those are
online, and calling an act as an amino acid
precursor to a citocolene.
But of course, there are compounds,
there are supplements that can further and
more acutely increase citocolene, and indeed,
I use these myself.
Almost effective.
One of the most effective ones I've found is alpha gpc,
alpha gpc consumes at dosages of 300 milligrams
to 600 milligrams prior to a workbout
or prior to a workout,
greatly in that least, one's ability to focus
and concentrate, at least that's been my experience.
And there are some good data in humans.
So how would I use alpha gpc,
I would use alpha gpc,
but taking it about 10 to 20 minutes prior to any time
I want to focus or concentrate very deeply.
I've taken as much as 600 milligrams at one time.
I want to find that 300 milligrams is enough for me,
and you might tend to be quite sensitive to supplements
and caffeine in general.
So I'll sometimes take it alongside your
maté or your maté or your coffee prior to a workout
or prior to a workout or prior to a workout,
and how to work, which I'm focusing on mental work.
So I'm reading writing,
and I have to be data analysis,
could be anything where I need a lot of focusing concentration.
And now a number of people are on tracking
about the recent study,
suggesting that alpha gpc,
when taking chronically or in any years,
clear increase one's vulnerability to strokes.
I've looked at those data,
and my read of the data,
that they're not very conducive,
although any time you see something like that,
it's study that's pointing to the fact that
the given compound might be a muscle capacity for strokes,
obviously we want to be concerned.
So we have to ask ourselves,
how, what mechanism that is,
could alpha gpc be increasing,
and the susceptibility is stroke.
And it seems to be related to increases in TMAO,
which is a marker related to the cardiovascular system.
And one known way to offset emphasis on seeing how it should be,
associated with alpha gpc,
or increases due to other things.
Other things, I would just share,
in particular, if the compound is actually
getting increased TMAO,
is to offset that by taking 600 milligrams of a gorilla.
Now, I've been taking, I'll put GnPC pretty consistently
for a million years.
I do not take it every day.
I would say I take it about four days per week,
again prior to workouts or about some cognitive work.
I have not signed my TMAO spikes,
but I'm not evaluating that my way of testing.
But when the last, I take 600 milligrams of garlic
and capsule form,
anytime I eat it.
And in the way, and I do have a general cardiovascular function,
and there's an interesting data on immune system function,
which is, in general, for real,
so I've been consuming 600 milligrams of capsules of garlic
for some period of time.
Some days I'll adjust just 1,600 milligrams of capsule
other times I'll take two,
but based on this reason,
the concerns of our TMAO,
I make it a point to always ingest
the 600 milligrams of capsule,
garlic, or anytime I take alpha gpc,
which, again, for me, is about 40 as per week.
So in our model of attention and focus,
now there's a CY taking out which CPC,
which, in general, is a CY,
calling transmission would be beneficial for
concentrations of focus and what it's taking
with, double espresso,
or I'll try taking it with,
with romantic, with further increased concentration
and focus because, as I mentioned earlier,
caffeine is going to increase.
But that friend, it's also going to increase the density
of dopamine receptors in the alpha gpc
is going to increase the CY's response
to spotlighting for cognition,
the ability to really amplify the activity
of specific molecules, which is largely
what's happening when you're trying to focus
and pay attention to something specifically.
So if one wants to increase the amount of dopamine
transmission in a drain and body,
or say, it's called increasing concentration or focus,
one of the most efficient ways to get
to the digestion of the amino acid,
of tyrosine, and the tyrosine can be derived from
food sources.
I might go look up for those very sweet sources of
the go-to-to-we web browser and put in foods
that contain a lot of altyrosine,
or get a rich array of choices to select from.
But in my case, I use altyrosine in caps of filling.
I will take 500 milligrams of altyrosine,
300 milligrams of altyrosine,
and a cup of coffee.
I'm careful to do this.
Early in the day, certainly not after two or three
p.m. because I don't want to diminish my agility
to fall and stay asleep that night.
Do this early in the day before.
Work out our B4, a bout of concentrated mental work.
Again, I tend to do this about four days per week,
so certainly not every time I sit down
to do work.
And I should also mention that I still tend to do the
behavioral tools.
I'll turn to use five minutes of hydroblease.
We'll find our B4, throughout the work session.
It's sometimes due to my spath or cold shower before.
I don't want to give the impression that I combine
every tool that I've talked about today for a given
work now.
That would be pretty wild too.
Take a cold shower, apple, altyrosine,
sick enough to treat Bc drink to espresso.
Listen to buy in the lobby.
That's a mean seems like a very inefficient way
to go about life.
In fact, I make an effort to try and use tools to increase
my ability to concentrate and focus,
but not to combine more than two or three of them at any
one at a time.
When I say two or three, what I mean is I will use supplements
like alpha GPC, altyrosine and caffeine together
before a certain work bounce.
I might follow these visual practice focusing on a given
location for a minute before I begin that work
out.
I might combine those.
Then another time I might take your cold shower
prior to doing some other days.
I can press, I'm slightly very well.
Or my enthusiasm.
We're going as such that I don't require any of these tools.
Again, there's no requirement.
There's no pressure on any of these tools.
It's very, very supplementary.
They used to be otherwise.
It's simply a matter of using the tools that are going
to allow you to achieve a stage of achievement,
to improve your ability to go into those
states without any help at all.
This is what I find particularly attractive about supplements.
It's not so much that they put you into the ideal state
for that work, and then you accomplish that work
and then you always have a lot of assessments.
I prefer to look at supplements of the sort that I just
described as a route into a deeper transition
to concentration that I use as a tool to teach myself
to focus and concentrate more deeply.
Such that I don't need those tools every single time
or try and focus and concentrate.
I think this isn't a certain point because I think that
many people can get supplementary as a approach
or a way of simply getting into a state
for which no other one will look like.
But in that context, I want to remind you
of the larger context of pharmaceutical technologies,
which is the vast landscape of prescription
from ecology for eight age and retention
deficit of high-grade activity in the sort.
Now I covered that landscape in a 10th to 10th
and in that episode on ADHD and focus.
And just to summarize, there is of course
lateral, riddle in, vivance, with gaffin'
or mo-down, a number of different compounds.
All of which generally increase
the open transmission of the brain,
so increasing dopamine, and all of which
generally increase epinephrine, a adrenaline transmission
in the brain and body.
And many of those compounds
have been of tremendous benefit
to children and even some adults who suffer from ADHD.
So properly prescribed by dosage, those compounds
can really help you clinically diagnose ADHD.
The way they help those people
is that it's a pricingizer.
You might think, well, they turn on the brain
and those little out of those people to concentrate and focus.
That's true, but they also have the benefit
of teaching children those brain circuits,
how to engage.
And that's one of the reasons why somewhat
paradoxically giving a stimulus, like riddle in the
lateral to a kid, that legitimately
need to obviously do want to do this without being
oversight, careful evaluation of psychiatrists.
But giving that to a kid as severe ADHD,
you would think that it makes that a more robust, less
safe that's focused and more distractable.
After all, riddle in, or down from the armorow
from the early sense or sins of this old kid who has
a attention deficit, hyperactivity disorder,
and give them these drugs that
are the transmission of dopamine and happen
ever, and I think, wow, it's going to make them even
more distractable if hyperactive.
They need it as the opposite effect.
It doesn't necessarily make them feel calm,
but they make them see all that they can force.
They really can anchor their attention.
And the idea is that it's teaching those men's circuits,
where those men's circuits rather are teaching themselves
to engage and to sync us and concentrate.
And the ideal situation is the total dose of those
compounds those drugs can be reduced over time as
of circuits learned to come online,
or if you're having some problems.
And oftentimes there's our maintenance of those drugs
over the long periods of time, although there is a
common practice nowadays of trying to diminish the dose
into the role.
That's in the context of the teaching
and the knowledge that we're not going to
achieve 80% or more college students.
Say this statistics are using the prescription drugs
and they are not in fact prescribed those prescription drugs.
So basically what I'm saying is there are a lot of people
using drugs designed for ADHD and North Leap City
because those drugs will affect them in
the increased focus and concentration, but I strongly
discourage the use of powerful prescription drugs
that have not been prescribed.
First of all, it's a little second of all.
It's quite dangerous to get the accelerator of those
neural circuits with such a bigger because it can increase
dependency and they can have an number of other side effects
outside the context of clinically diagnosed and prescribed
ADHD medications.
But on the context of supplementation,
the increase in dopamine, acetocoline,
and epinephrine that one can achieve from saying
100 milligrams of all tyrosine, 300 milligrams of alpha
cheap and seed and a couple of coffee is going to be
substantial in terms of single and the seed for prescription drugs.
So you're getting a modest effect that can
similar to the more teach those brain circuits for
focus and concentration, how do we gauge better.
But as a general factor for all of this,
I think, always say it's getting in again
probably until the day I die, which hopefully is when we talk
about the same method that's always believed that
behavioral tools should come before.
Behavioral tools should come first.
Then focus on the nutrition factor of the behavioral
and nutrition tools.
And of course, get excellent sleep.
Then focus on supplementation.
And then, only if those are failing to
bring your brain and body to the state and
to be in to perform well in school and work in life, et cetera.
Do I require them to people lean on
prescription drugs?
Now, there's a caveat to doctorate's
and found under conditions, lesions.
So you're eating disorders,
specific and pulse of disorder, bipolar disorders,
depression, pressure, people are truly at risk
and suicide.
So, behavioral health effects are behavioral health effects
and they're really at their lives or
high risk and their overall mood and well being
is at risk.
It's often the case that people cannot access
the brain states require to shift themselves
purely with behavioral treatment and treatment.
So, again, for a typical person who's not suffering
from one of the psychiatric disorders that
mentioned before or other psychiatric disorders,
schizophrenia, et cetera,
I strongly encourage you to look to behavioral
tools first.
Nutrition, then some end-to-stage.
Then, it's only if there's a remaining need
to prescription drugs.
This contrast, right now,
is a part of the typical scenario here about these days,
where college students or other people will say,
oh, yeah, here there's this drug,
but my band said, can immediately put me
to a state of high use for physical concentration.
Now, listen, if you have ADHD,
by all means, talk to a physician,
talk to a great psychiatrist,
and figure out whether or not that's right for you.
But if you don't, again, behavioral tools,
nutrition supplementation,
and in particular, those behavioral tools
are going to be the ones that are going to allow you
to teach you a nurse circuits how to focus
and concentrate better.
I cannot overstate the importance of that.
That the behavioral tools, and to some extent,
the supplementation,
and by the way, behavioral tools,
really allow you to bring up your medical circuits
so that you can focus and concentrate
to the death and our degree and the duration
that's going to be best served as a mental physical wounds.
Now, there's one other problem that I've used
from time to time, and that I continue to use
in order to increase focus and concentration.
And I will use this in combination with the other supplements
that I talked about before.
And that's phenolethylene.
Phenolethylene is a misoctomy synthesis pathway
so it increases dopamine transmission.
It tends to function a little bit differently than
al-tirecine.
So everyone's in a while.
I'll swap out al-tirecine and put in 500
of my liver and a phenolethylene.
Or sometimes, there's really a little bit of heart
on the dopamine system,
and I'm going to be doing a long-bought
and 10-sport time to take these 300 milligrams of
alpha-chompuses, 500 milligrams of acetyltyrcynes,
and generally take that with some caffeine.
And I should mention, I don't go past about 100 or 200 milligrams
of caffeine because I really like to do it with some jittery.
I don't really like all it's means.
The goal to be alert, but so alert then I can't focus on anything
I'm not interested in traveling since I had the attack after all.
But, sometimes, either swap in or add that 500 milligrams
of phenolethylene, if you know what the lamine is
in the p A pathway, no, I've talked about this at previous
by a certain dopamine motivation.
And drive, and say, very short-lived compound,
so what I'll tend to do is take it once at the beginning of the
workout and sometimes in the middle of the workout,
take another 500 milligrams of capsule.
But what I just described is that I will go
to compounds, alpha-chpc, l-tirecine, phenolethylene,
and caffeine.
That's a fairly rare occurrence that I've been trying to buy
and really only have the conditions in which I have to do it.
And tensely, challenging about mental or physical work.
I would say the frequency of which I combine all four of those things
that's probably about the ones every two weeks
to be really looking for.
Again, being careful and to do that early part of the day,
certainly before the new tower, so that I am in no way going to
destroy the rest.
I realize that many of you are probably wondering about
or hoping that all discussed things like
Lyonsman or the Rassotans or some of the other compounds that are known to
powerfully modulate dopamine, epinephrine, and acetycoline systems.
To be quite direct, there are four two main of these compounds
to renew in a single episode.
And they all generally tap into the same set of processes.
Again, epinephrine, shashiro, and I think you can focus
acetycoline, which is the arrow headed south,
and then dopamine, which is the sort of pillar behind the
earth, and allows it to continually drive forward through
an out of mental or physical work.
There is a wonderful site of mention,
it's about time to be four on this podcast at
examin.com.
That wonderful site, this is examin.com, has recently been updated.
They changed their format.
It was terrific before it provided links to
relevant studies that are taught at a specific compound.
They talked about the magnitude of the effect of
the human effect matrix, are really focused on human studies,
with links to those studies and on and on.
The new revamp version of her jamey.com is even better.
It's really next to that, like, really applaud
that for your strategic terrific job, and organize
the information we're aware of, interesting pages
that you can read there about different compounds,
but it's any compounds.
You can go below, but I'll foster that, I'll serene.
I'll for cheap, cheap, cheap, and you're going to get
rich or rich information about those compounds.
And if you were to put in a specific goal state,
that is focused on the concentration,
which is really, really, really, really,
hormones, like testosterone,
etc. You're going to get a rich arrangement
of compounds, supplements, as well as
links to the studies on those compounds.
And some details about those particular studies,
is absolutely phenomenal site.
It's one, I rely on thousands of new
other people rely on, and I encourage you to
check it out again, the URL as examin.com.
So today we talked about a number of different tools,
and to some extent some mechanisms involved
in concentration and focus.
The goal has been to provide you an understanding of
your chemical systems.
A little bit about the neural circuits that can allow
you to achieve states of attention and focus.
In contrast to previous episodes of the
human-in-law podcast, we're going to cover these topics
in tremendous damage that relates to mechanism,
and also focused on tools today.
I largely focused on tools.
We talked about behavioral tools,
like a meditation that's 13 minutes long,
done daily, specifically to improve your ability to focus,
and in fact, our data to support that it will.
No, since we talked about visual officials,
we talked about very supplement,
Alphate GBC, phenolethlamine,
altarsic, supplements that I use to
track the negative, and we'll see our
concentration.
Focus, this is not going to be a great team,
the omega-3 is talking about the importance of
sleep, which modulates our ability to function
mentally and physically overall.
Optimize that, please.
And we talked about it on a number of other protocols
that you have in the group.
My hope in giving you all this information in one single
association is that you won't be able to pick and choose
which of these protocols you would like to
incorporate into your attempts to improve
your focus and concentration.
Again, I don't recommend, I mean, all of these protocols
all that once, I recommend is picking a handful of them,
maybe one or two, even three or four,
or a try and different combinations at different
times of day and for different purposes,
or mental work or physical work, et cetera,
find what is best for you.
Once again, the goal is to teach your
pressure to increase neuroscience in the
neural circuits that allow you not just to focus,
but to refocus your attention.
And I'd be remiss if I didn't buy
the attention that it's also critical to the
level of attention.
Highly encouraging that it's a
take a period of time each day to day-dream
to walk down the hall, well, looking at your
phone to not have to incorporate more sensory
information to each other, place increasing
demands on yourself to focus and see and realize
how being a period of a deliberate
denigration and chief focus in.
Allow your brand to focus so much better
when you do decide to return to a balance of
focus, balance and try to do works,
I've heard a visit to your balance.
So I want to thank you for joining me for this
discussion about the two of you, focusing on
some tricks.
If you're learning from entering join this podcast,
be subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us.
In addition, please subscribe to the podcast
on Spotify and Apple.
That's also a zero-cost way to support us.
And on both Spotify and Apple, you can
leave us up to a five-star review.
If you have questions for us,
or comments or suggestions,
and you guess that you like us to consider
bringing on the human-of-land podcast,
please put all that in the comments section
on YouTube.
We do read all those comments.
Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode.
That's the best way to support this podcast.
During today's episode,
I don't know many producers say that the human-of-land podcast
we discuss supplements that are necessary for everybody.
Many people derive tremendous benefits from it.
Sleep and it's a focus in hormone augmentation and so forth.
As mentioned at the beginning of today's episode,
that you've been in that podcast is not part of
the system with a mental supplements,
because they're a very highest quality.
They ship internationally,
and they have single ingredient for relations,
and dosages that will allow you to construct the vast
molecular, biological, all cost-effective
segmentation protocol for your needs.
If you're interested in the supplement,
it's a kind of a given maladapac.
You can go to live-momentas.
It's about OUSU,
at momentas.com, slash.
If you're not already learning less on social media,
we are a human-lab on Twitter,
and we are also a human-lab on Instagram.
Both places,
I talk about science and science related tools,
some of which will overlap with the contents and topics
about using the podcast.
Much of which is unique from the contents,
and certainly the format cover on the Cuban-lab podcast.
Again, that's a human-lab on Instagram,
and a human-lab on Twitter.
The human-lab podcast has its newsletter,
and that's from the slide.
Some reason in essential protocols for the world
on podcast episodes can access it totally free of charge
by going to Cuban-lab.com,
go to menu and click on newsletter,
provide your email.
We do not share your email with anybody,
and by your screen on your newsletter.
We're also examples of previous newsletters there
that download as PDFs right away
without even having the sign up.
So thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion.
All of us are on the mechanism,
and especially with their tools for enhancing
concentration and focus,
and last but certainly not enough.
Thank you for your interest.
Thank you.
